Fed Raised Rates, but Bond Market Had Other Ideas; Investor demand pushed down Treasury yields, highlighting challenge facing U.S. central bank

On the day theFederal Reserveimplemented its plan to raise interest rates, driving up overnight borrowing costs, broader market forces conspired instead to drive other U.S. interest rates down.

The Fed increased its overnight target rate for lending between banks early Thursday, hitting 0.35%. But yields on Treasurys—from one-month bills to 10-year notes—fell as demand from investors drove prices higher.

It is a conundrum that Fed officials have grappled with for months leading up to the decision to end seven years of near-zero rates. While the Fed can orchestrate a rise in its overnight target rate, buying and selling by investors worldwide largely dictate the movement of yields in the $12.8 trillion Treasury market, a forum that effectively sets the borrowing rates for everything from mortgages to corporate loans.

Strong global demand for U.S. Treasurys, which tends to push down yields, is potentially creating a conflict with the central bank's plans to raise U.S. interest rates.

Treasurys are being sought out by numerous sources now, thanks to soft global growth, regulatory changes that increase interest from banks and money-market funds, among other institutions, and investors and banks boosting cash holdings at a time when markets are broadly perceived to be fully valued and potentially vulnerable to a shock.

For central-bank officials, the divergence of bill yields from its policy rate was anticipated, but the longer it persists, the more it could be a cause of concern. That is because the Fed needs to look like it can control money-market rates, and it risks a credibility problem if it cannot.

The Fed, which raised its target range a quarter point to 0.25% to 0.5%, faces a delicate task in guiding the U.S. economy to a more normal footing. The effort stands to be made more challenging by the crosswinds roiling economies and financial markets around the globe, including soft growth, rising debt burdens and a deepening commodity bust.

Adding a further layer of complexity, central banks around the globe are pursuing divergent policies, potentially opening policy gaps that threaten to amplify market volatility at a time when stocks and bonds in the U.S. and many other markets are trading at historically high valuations.

While the Bank of Mexicoraised its policy rateThursday, in a move that is expected to help protect the value of the peso, the European Central Bank and People's Bank of China are pursuing easing policies to bolster flagging domestic demand. Bahrain, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates each raised key interest rates Thursday to keep pace with the Fed, while Taiwan cut its benchmark rate to combat a recession.

Traders said Thursday's fed-funds rate opening level, up from 0.15% as of Wednesday, showed the market was reacting in an orderly fashion to the Fed's decision to raise rates.

Meanwhile the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield fell to 2.24%, while the two-year U.S. note yield fell to 1% a day after hitting its highest level in five years.

Thursday's decline in the 10-year Treasury yield underscores the manifold challenges facing the Fed. Not only must the central bank manage short-term interest rates, it must also ensure that rates on mortgage and consumer loans will rise gradually to reflect the growth of the economy.

In U.S. debt markets, Thursday was “business as usual," said Garret Sloan, head of short-term fixed-income strategy at Wells Fargo Securities LLC. But “this may not be indicative of the dynamics coming into year-end and into 2016."

Some analysts took the divergence as a sign that money- market mutual funds, which handle cash for individual and institutional investors, were purchasing Treasurys in response to new rules forcing the funds to either focus on government securities or adopt a floating net asset value.

The Dow industrials on Thursday declined 253.25 points, or 1.4%, to 17495.84, more than reversing Wednesday's 224-point gain. Selling was broad-based, led by a fresh decline in energy shares following the latest decline in oil. Nymex crude dropped 1.6% to $34.95 a barrel, its lowest close since February 2009 and has fallen 6.4% the last two days.

A Fed spokesman declined to comment.

Thursday's rise in the fed funds rate registered as a victory for Fed officials, but traders said they were on guard for the possibility of future lapses in money-market rates. Among the markers under scrutiny: whether short-term Treasury rates trade above or below the fed-funds rate.

The U.S. Treasury Department has sought in recent weeks to take advantage of the low rates by boosting issuance of short-term bills, but demand continues to outpace the available supply, analysts said.

“This is a very stable market; predictability matters a lot," said Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, a monetary economist in the National Bureau of Economic Research at Harvard University, of money markets.

As Treasury yields slumped, other money-market rates rose, a sign of the Fed's success in moving market expectations higher.

Rates on private-sector, overnight repo loans between brokers rose to 0.45% Thursday from 0.4% a day earlier, according to Wrightson ICAP, their highest since March. The three-month London interbank offered rate, or Libor, rose to 0.57% from 0.53%, its highest level since 2012, according to Citigroup Inc.

The market's faith in the Fed's command over rates is critical at a time when some lawmakers are proposing more scrutiny over its monetary-policy decision making.

Money-market funds and other lenders on Thursday put more than $105 billion into a central-bank program designed to soak up liquidity in short-term borrowing markets.

Keeping rates higher is expected to be particularly tricky at year-end, when many investors unwind longer term bets and move into short-dated securities and cash, and banks rein in their activities.

“If they increase their policy rate, but all these other short-term market rates do not rise, I think they'd be disappointed," said Peter Yi, who oversees about $230 billion of short-term fixed income products at Northern Trust Asset Management.