J.P. Morgan In Settlement

J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. will pay $307 million to settle charges that two of its units failed to disclose conflicts of interest to wealthy clients, U.S. regulators said Friday.

Under a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, J.P. Morgan admitted it violated securities laws by failing to tell wealth-management customers it preferred to invest their money in its own mutual funds and hedge funds as well as third-party managed hedge funds that shared fees with the bank.

The deal, which had been expected and ends a long-running probe, includes $127.5 million in disgorged profits. It also includes a $127.5 million penalty from the SEC and a $40 million penalty from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, which was involved in the case because some of the preferred investments included commodity pools.

"This case underscores our continued focus on rooting out undisclosed conflicts. Here the undisclosed conflicts were pervasive," SEC enforcement director Andrew Ceresney said.

A J.P. Morgan spokesman said the bank had enhanced its client disclosures over the last two years. "The disclosure weaknesses cited in the settlements were not intentional and we regret them," spokesman Darin Oduyoye said.

The bank had reached the agreement earlier this year, but an announcement had stalled as the bank sought to temper restrictions triggered by the agreement that would limit the bank's ability to raise funds for clients.

On Friday, the SEC voted to allow J.P. Morgan to continue raising money for clients like hedge funds. But the agency told the bank that in order to do so it had to hire an independent consultant to review its policies governing private offerings, involve its senior executives in fixing problems and make public an annual report from the consultant.

The SEC has stepped up its enforcement of such add-on punishments as critics have questioned whether the agency has been soft on Wall Street.

The case itself deals with two of J.P. Morgan's businesses: its wealth-management business, which offers investment products for clients with a net worth between $250,000 and $5 million, and its U.S. private bank, which services clients worth more than $5 million.

According to the facts outlined in the agreement, the bank designed and operated a program for its wealth-management customers, Chase Strategic Portfolio, with a preference for J.P. Morgan-managed mutual funds, but didn't disclose that preference. Between 2008 and 2013, the program invested around $10 billion in proprietary funds, out of a total of $32.6 billion in assets. Until early 2012, according to the settlement, at least 47% of the assets were in proprietary funds. That percentage fell to 27% by the end of 2014, the settlement said.

J.P. Morgan's private bank similarly preferred bank products. In early 2011, for example, one of its products had invested 47% of mutual-fund assets and 35% of hedge-fund assets in proprietary funds. Until 2011 it disclosed to those clients investment principles that governed the funds and said that it preferred to use J.P. Morgan-affiliated managers, but "mistakenly removed" the language from the disclosures. The bank didn't replace it until January 2014, according to the settlement.